# Hashing pt. 1

Type: Note
Description: Notes on lecture from 02/19/2025
Last Edited: February 28, 2025 3:28 PM

## Hash Functions

<aside>
‼️

**Simple Rules:**

1. Same input = same output
2. Different inputs = different outputs
    1. Normally, things that look very similar give wildly different results
</aside>

## Data Transmission Application

You can use hash functions to validate data flowing through a server. To make sure the received message is the sent message, you can send the message and the hash of the message. If you has the received message and it does not match the received hash, then you can throw an error and ask the client to send the message again. Since similar results give vastly different hash outputs, it is easy to see when something has been changed. This only works if both clients and servers agree on a hash function to use.

This also means that if the message is really long, you don’t have to send the full duplicate but instead a short hash.

## Designing Hash Functions

Takes a ton of advanced math to design these that is beyond the scope of CS106B.

## Working With Hash Functions

```cpp
HashFunction<T> hashFn = forSize(n)

// Imagine T is a string

int hash = hashFn("Nuclear codes?!")
```

You can specify the type of value that will get hashed, like string, int, etc. and also determine the size of the hash ranging from zero to $n-1$.

This variable holds a function. This is because in C++, functions are higher-order objects.

## Hash Collision

A hash collision is a pair of inputs to a hash function that produce the same output. When working with has functions with a constrained range, hash collisions are unavoidable.

## Implementing a Set

The strategy for making fast sets is to organize large datasets in small collections called buckets.

- Use a hash function as a rule to let us know where each object should go. Equal inputs = equal outputs so we can sort things by their hash.
- To find something, only look in the bucket assigned to it (think of looking for socks in a drawer instead of a pile of clothes)

### `OurSet.h`

```cpp
class OurSet {
public:
	OurSet();
	
	void add(const std::string& str);
	bool contains(const std::string& str) const;
	
private:
	Vector<Vector<std::string>> buckets;
	HashFunction<std::string> hashFn;
	int numElems;
};
```

### `OurSet.cpp`

```cpp
// We will not change the amount of buckets as we change the set
const int kInitialBucketCount = 6;

OurSet::OurSet() {
	for (int i = 0; i < kInitialBucketCount; i++){
		buckets.add({ });
	}
	
	hashF = forSize(kInitialBucketCount);
	
	numElems = 0;
}

OurSet::add(const string& value) {
	if(contains(value)) return;

	// The hashF function returns the index of the bucket in buckets
	int bucket = hashF(value);
	buckets[bucket] += value;
	numElems++;
}

OurSet::contains(const string& value) const {
	int bucket = hashF(value);
	
	for (std::string v: buckets[bucket]) {
		if (v == value) return true;
	}
	
	return false;
}
```

Note that we’re relying on a vector and would need to use a pointer with dynamic allocation to truly implement it from scratch.

### How fast is this?

Imagine we have **$b$** buckets and $n$ elements in our table. We will have an average of $\frac{n}{b}$ items in each bucket. The average insertion, deletion, or lookup is therefore:

$$
O(1+\frac{n}{b})
$$

The load factor of a hash table, denoted as $\alpha$, is the ratio of items to buckets:

$$
\alpha=\frac{n}{b}
$$

If we keep $\alpha$ low (say $\alpha \leq 2$), then the average operation cost is $O(1)$. This is extremely fast!

## Conclusion

- This implementation is called Chained Hashing
- It works because you can constrain the length of the hash and therefore cause several hash collisions. So the hash collisions are placed into the same bucket.